Shall I do like an official recording? I'm going to pass it over to Posit and Jeremy in particular
to start the session. Thank you. Yeah, well, thanks for being here. For those that don't
know me, I'm Jeremy Allen. I work at Posit. I'm on our marketing team. I've been in sales and I've
been in customer success, mostly helping public sector Posit customers all around the world,
lots in the U.S., Canada, the U.K., Asia, a ton in Europe. So I've gotten a good amount of
exposure to public sector folks who are using Posit tools, and that includes Quarto, but also
Shiny, all the other open source packages, plus our professional tools like Workbench,
Posit Connect, and Posit Package Manager. In fact, Zoe and I started planning this Q&A session
when I was still a part of our sales, our public sector sales team. I've since moved over to our
product marketing team where I can focus a bit more on products and really helping Posit
understand the unique requirements of our public sector customers. So this event still fits really
well with that. So we're happy to learn about what you're doing and how you're using the open
source R and Python packages and what your workflows look like. And then I have our Quarto
team or representatives from our Quarto team with us so that we can answer your questions about
Quarto. So let me let them introduce themselves. Andrew, do you want to go first?
Sure. My name is Andrew Holtz. I work actually across a couple of different teams. I work at
the Quarto team, Shiny team, MLverse teams, and just really excited to be here. I mean, honestly,
Christoph and Carlos know way thousands times percent more than I do about Quarto,
but I'm really interested to hear kind of what the challenges you all have are in adopting it
and figuring out how we fit it with a small team trying to get a big product out the door. So
really looking forward to the discussion. Thanks. Andrew is being humble. He's the head of open
source engineering. So that includes Shiny and Quarto and all the other open source teams.
Carlos, Christoph, who wants to go next?
Can you all hear me? Still making sure that my mic, okay. Thank you. I'm Carlos. I've been
working at Posit for about three years now in Quarto all of the time. I'm currently the
lead engineer on the project. I started a few years ago, like I said, three years or so,
on incorporating some of the interactive visualization, sort of reactive JavaScript,
so very much on the engineering part. Before joining Posit, I was a professor. I used to
live in Tucson until just a month ago or so. So I lived there for 10 years. I was a professor at
the University of Arizona for like eight years or so. And I've always been in the periphery of
open source development for sort of scientific communication. I wrote my thesis on that kind
of thing and been working on it ever since. And so it's great to be at Posit and working
on open source that gets to sort of help all you do incredibly important work. And so it's just
really a joy and an honor to be part of this. So hi, everyone. I'm Christophe. So I'm also in
the Quarto team. So I joined Posit initially on the R Markdown team, and I'm still working on R
Markdown and maintaining the R package. But now most of my time is on the Quarto project
alongside all the R work I'm still doing. So I'm coming from the R community.
Thanks, gentlemen. Appreciate it. And we also have Colin from our partner, Jumping Rivers, who's
over on your side of the world. Colin, do you want to say hi?
Hi, I'm Colin Gillespie of Jumping Rivers. I've probably met most of you at the NHR over the last,
I don't know, four, five, six, seven years. And as Jeremy said, we're based in the UK up
in Newcastle and we do lots of R, Posit, Python things. Thanks.
Excellent. And let me give a quick overview of how we're going to run the meeting today.
I'm going to drop a link in the chat right now. This link is to the site where you can
ask your questions anonymously. If you want to put your name, you can put your name,
and then you can upvote questions from other people. So that way the popular questions rise
to the top and we'll make sure we get those answered, even if we can't answer all the
questions. So make sure you upvote other questions that you see that you like, and you might want to
have answered. That way we cover the most important things first. So that'll be the majority of what
we do today. Go through this Q&A. Our Quarto team and myself will help answer those questions.
I would like to start us off with a little bit of Q&A from us to you. We would like to know a
little bit more about some of the R and Python projects you have going on. Obviously, don't tell
us anything that's proprietary or sensitive in nature, but if you don't mind, let us know a
couple of really important projects you're working on that require some kind of communication or
reporting that Quarto might be used for, either Quarto documents or Quarto websites or now Quarto
dashboards. And then help us understand what these projects are for and why they're important,
and then that'll help us have a feel for the kind of work that you're in day to day.
And if you don't mind, if you do want to volunteer that information and speak up,
introduce yourself and tell us where you're at. If you're associated with a particular NHS trust or
a larger part of the NHS organization, give us a sense of where you're at.
Who wants to tell us a little bit about some of your favorite R projects?
Yeah, I see a hand up. Jason, go for it.
Hi, thanks for this talk. It's really moved me forward to it. I adopted Quarto quite early on and
often thought it was Quattro, like the Audi Quattro or whatever. I was saying it incorrectly
for years. And I use parameterized reporting to help support feasibility
assessments for research studies that we deliver in our emergency department.
So I lead a team of nurses that are funded through our NIHR. And we are often invited to take part
in studies. But what's important is to know whether or not you have the right population
to deliver a clinical trial. And that's what I do. So I do a lot of research in the emergency
trial because clinical trials are lots of work and they're expensive to run. And if you aren't
going to be able to deliver a study, you shouldn't really open it. You should focus on other studies.
So I use kind of our national data sets that we collect and use parameters to build SQL queries
that then build out analysis and population reports to suggest whether or not we might have a
population that would meet the requirements of a study. And whereas I used to do each one manually,
I've turned it into a kind of a reproducible pipeline so that I just put in the SNOMED
codes for the disease population parameters and it runs in five minutes. And I get the same report
out, which I can send to the investigators and they can decide whether or not they want to
pick it up and run with it or not. And a few other bits and pieces for kind of more
academic focused work, but mostly reporting results of stuff as well.
Yeah, that's great detail. And if you don't mind, I'll ask a couple of follow-up questions
because I just want to help sort of situate the kind of studies you're talking about within the
broader NHS. Can you give us an example of some of the feasibility studies that you've had to do
if they were associated with particular projects in the NHS? And what I'm really looking for is
if your study went well and you gave it to whoever needed it, were they seeking that
as part of a larger project or implementation of something new in the NHS or for, I don't know,
a broader piece of funding? How can we connect the dots up from the studies you're talking about to
operations in the NHS?
So we, so most of it links to academic outputs. So there are a few papers that we've put together
now that are based off data extraction through quattro reproducible pipelines now that I've
put together. So we've got one that's built around head injury processes and the whole
pipeline was based around a quattro report for extracting patients who attend the emergency
department between two date ranges with presenting complaint of head injury who have a CT head.
And then I extract and pull all the data that describes their pathway. The process,
their studies are all ethically approved and consented appropriately, obviously. And
that kind of, that's just kind of become the routine way that we're working on these things.
In terms of like the delivering trials for other people, we're a really very successful team and
one of the most successful research teams in the country for delivering emergency trials.
So, and part of that is that we don't open trials that won't be relevant to our population.
So we've taken part in studies, looking at patients with chest pain and the combination
of the tooling that I've got available to me in through R and quattro and our
reasonably, decently developed EHR, which collects decent data about patients, has meant
that I can automate the extraction of complete observational cohort studies, which other
centres in the UK can't do. And so we've put 7,500 patients into a observational study
of cardiac chest pain. And we're one of the only centres in the UK who have been able to do that
because everyone else would have had to collect it manually. But that's kind of a combination of,
very cool, you know, having a good EHR, collecting good data and then having the knowledge how to
extract it appropriately. Yeah, that's fantastic. Really good context. Appreciate that.
Are there any other R projects or major workflows that you all are working on you want us to
know about before we dive into the questions?
Looks like Chris has his, there's some hands raised, Jeremy.
Yep, I see it. Go ahead, Chris.
Thanks. It was just a bit of context, I suppose, for how we and my team use it. So,
hi, everyone. I'm Chris Maney. I'm Head Data Scientist with Birmingham and Solihull Integrated
Care Board. And because not everybody works in our country or indeed system, just to explain a
little bit about how the health service is structured. So, we have a national health
service, which is all under one umbrella, but it's actually composed of lots of different
organisations who work under a common sort of banner. We have regional things that organise
the care and the funding, and they are called integrated care boards. And under them, they have
a so-called integrated care system. So, we have hospitals and other providers underneath those
in regions. So, I work for an integrated care board rather than a provider, rather than hospital.
So, the sorts of work that myself and our team do are things like looking at population health
changes, forecasting forward into the future, trying to work out what our population might need.
Often things to do with dissecting the makeup of the current population,
dissecting the activity at different providers. And we, I suppose, like many other people in
the country, are moving, I guess, technically from a profession where really we weren't really
a defined profession. We were often people who were fairly smart and people who use computers.
Which has gone through a series of people using Excel, building up SQL skills, using wider BI
tools. And then really with, I suppose, data science becoming more accessible, maybe what
2012 onwards really, we started to see people who were maybe interested and maybe with academic
interests picking up R or Python or other things, or bringing stuff in from other places they've
worked. The NHSR community, I think, rode that wave a little bit where there were people
dotted around organisations saying, how do we do this? We can't get this through our IT departments.
We can't get the right infrastructure. How do we do this? Can we share and try and work together
to do this? So, I've got a small but very smart team who work across various different things.
So, there's very strong SQL focus. There's a lot of Power BI work, but there's a lot of people
with some R skill to a lesser or greater extent. I suppose I spend probably 80% of my time in R,
but I have a couple of Python people as well. So, with Quarto coming forward in the last few
years, it's been very useful to me because I can now look at a reproducible framework across my
Python users and my R users. Because before that, I was pushing R Markdown because that's fantastic.
But I couldn't spool that out to my Python users as well. So, we're at the point where we're
trying to do that. I suppose I'm interested now on how do I move the team towards
code first stuff on GitHub, whether it's R or Python, communicating in a standard way using
templates through Quarto. So, I suppose that's kind of my interest today. So, some of my questions
are a bit more along the lines of how do we do templates, how do we do stuff that my team
can use, I suppose, rather than Quarto features. Does that help? Yeah, it's fantastic. Thanks.
So, what I propose is we jump into the questions and we'll go through that for a little bit.
And then we'll probably take a break kind of in the middle of that and maybe ask you a couple
more questions before we end up. We have until the top of the hour. It's like 9.24 on my side.
So, we still have about 35 minutes. All right. So, I'll just start asking the questions.
Posit team, feel free to just jump in if you want to be the one to answer.
If not, I'll just call on someone. All right. Our first question is, what are your favorite
features and capabilities of Quarto that you think are underutilized?
All right. One of the first things I implemented when I started on the project
was the observable JavaScript integration. So, this is a little on the wonky programming side
for folks who are not deep in it. But there's a separate company, actually, that builds an
open source product called observable JavaScript, which is a way to make your web pages, make it
very easy to write web pages with interactive content in a way that is very close to what Shiny
does. But instead of writing R code, you write JavaScript. So, it's kind of like a reactive
JavaScript thing, which is really great if you want to write sort of fast interactive content
that doesn't need to sort of talk back to a server as often in R. And one of my really favorite
things that I think is actually underutilized is that in Quarto, the R reactives that you get from
Shiny. So, if you're using Quarto to build a Shiny app, which you can do. So, you can actually
have Quarto generate from a single markdown page, both the UI and the server page to get real Shiny
applications going. If that page has observable reactives, they both work together transparently.
So, from R, you can refer to the JavaScript observables to get sort of JavaScript values. And
from JavaScript reactives, you can refer to Shiny reactives. And they both work reactively and know
what parts go on the server and what parts go on the client. So, if you can do both of those things,
they just work transparently with each other, which is quite nice because observable has a huge
library of JavaScript observables that is sort of quite different from the Shiny thing. So,
if you find one piece of observable JavaScript, you can just directly import it and use it from
anywhere on the web, and it just works. And then you can sort of reuse them within your Shiny
dashboard. So, it's a way to get your Shiny dashboards to do something that's quite sophisticated
with JavaScript, and it feels sort of native and nice. And so, we have documentation on that,
but I think it's underutilized because maybe folks need to know a little bit more about
like more things. But for, you know, like the people that really want it, it's really nice.
And it just works. So, that's my pick.
Any, Christophe? If not, we'll go to the next question.
You know, I can say something. Like, maybe it could be only an impression, but like for me,
it's all the Quarto steaming system that we have. It's here since the beginning of Quarto,
and I think it's like underutilized, or it was, I would say. And we worked on brand feature,
which is new, and you may or not know about yet, which hopefully will simplify the use of that.
But it's really powerful because it's something we started to do late in R Markdown. And so,
in latest R Markdown version, we had like features thanks to BS Lib work and all the work from the
Shiny team to like customize document, but it's way less advanced than what we have in Quarto.
But it's required to know a bit of SCSS and some technology. And so, I'm thinking maybe we need
more like documentation, templates, examples. But hopefully, the brand system will help to
get like customization because it's really easy to get non-default outputs with Quarto.
I guess the answer is it's underutilized because we released it just over a month ago on the latest
version of Quarto. But RAN DMO, if you haven't seen it, is a really nice way to create sort of
themed documents. And they theme not only HTML, but they also theme your types to PDFs, which is
quite nice. So, you get sort of this consistent output. And they theme presentations, and they
theme dashboards all uniformly from the same format. So, if you need to do like branding,
and you have fonts and colors, you just edit this one YAML file, and then it works across formats.
So, yeah. And to piggyback on that, it also works on Shiny. So, if you get your brand.yaml,
you have a file that becomes very portable, not just across Quarto documents to make it really
easy, but also into Shiny as well. And one of the goals that we have for this year is we're
going to be putting engineering time into making it very easy for plotting libraries in multiple
languages to also support that. So, if you're using, for example, ggplot, you should be able
to just plot a brand.yaml file and like with one command have it pick it up, and then your charts
are now themed exactly in the same way. We're hoping to do that for matplotlib and seaborn,
and then perhaps for plot9 and some of the other plotting libraries. But we hope to have sort of
good coverage for these things, not only in the documents themselves, but on the libraries that
use them. So, like from ggplot, matplotlib, to like great tables in GT, and so on.
Yes, Chris, that touches a little bit on what you were wishing for a minute ago was how to
help bring everyone together with some more coherent outputs. And brand.yaml will definitely
help make your different outputs look the same based on a single yaml file. I do want to just
make it clear what Carlos wrapped up with. That theming across, say, an HTML report output and a
presentation output will not translate into the plots that are within those outputs. But the
outputs will share the same colors, fonts, all the things that are in the brand.yaml. But as of
right now, that won't be passed into the plots. So, in the plot code, you'll still need to specify
your color and your font, that kind of thing. But, Carlos, I believe the next iteration of this
is going to bring that into the plots within the outputs. Yeah, we've developed this brand.yaml
feature very consciously as sort of independently of the system. So, it's not even a sense of,
like, you know, in the next iteration of Quarto is that now we are going to do, like, a bit of
engineering outreach and sort of, like, go into the folks that write those libraries and just,
like, contribute code that will make that work well. And hopefully, that code will be incorporated,
and then in future versions, it will just be there. But, yeah, so stay tuned for that. That's coming
this year. Sweet. All right. And the next question.
I'm sorry, Jeremy. I just wanted to piggyback one comment. You know, Carlos also mentioned types.
I think just in general, one of the things I think that's really exciting, again, it's kind of
cheating underutilized because it's kind of on the newer side. But Quarto is continuing to invest in
making types work really well. So, if you have to generate PDFs, and you've fought with LaTeX,
and you're sick of that nonsense, you know, types, and the templating, and how fast it is,
and it's really clean, and Quarto can work really well with it, and we're going to continue to kind
of, as I said, invest and chat with them and figure out how we can make it all work really
well. So, it's something to investigate if that's an area that you work in, generating complex
reports. Like, we did our PositPBC report with it, and it came out really well. So, I'm pretty
excited about it. Yeah. Continuing, apparently, the tradition of systems with hard-to-pronounce
words. Typed is how they want you to pronounce that. It is a system that exploded, sort of,
in popularity in the last … like, it's existed only for five years, but it's sort of … stands
a genuine chance of displacing LaTeX in academic circles, which is not something I thought I would
ever say in my lifetime, which is fantastic. So, I've used LaTeX for my previous academic life,
and it's great, but it's also really, really awful in terms of user experience and how slow it is,
and Typed fixes many, many of those things. You can use it as a standalone system, and it's great,
but Quarto offers great support for it, so you can have your markdown files, and you can just use
format Typed, and it's an alternate PDF format. So, it generates PDFs just like they would
for LaTeX, but it generates them a lot faster, and there's a lot … it's a lot easier to control
appearance and things of that sort. So, yeah, I guess that's another new underutilized favorite
feature that I think will be much more popular, like, two years from now, even.
Yeah, that's a good one. I have a follow-up question, and this is for the NHS folks,
about your reporting outputs, particularly PDF. Do you have strict requirements for the format
of your PDF output? And the reason I ask, or perhaps let me give you an analogy from the U.S.
One of the agencies that I work with is NOAA. That's our National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Agency. When they produce reports, they have some internal regulation that says they have to
produce a Microsoft Word version, an HTML version, and a PDF version, and they all have to look the
same. Do you have a kind of requirement like that? Go ahead, Chris. Different organizations
might have their own requirements, but there isn't an NHS-wide thing for anything other than
a national statistic. So, if you have a regulated national statistic, you have to publish it in
certain formats. So, they have to be open, accessible formats. So, you have to have the
open equivalents of kind of Word documents and things like that, and they're supposed to look
identical. But that's the only place I've seen that requirement in our area is when you have a
regulated official statistic. Is that specification public? Can I find it and look at it?
Let me have a little look and see if I can find it.
Sure, if you find it, just drop it in the chat. Go ahead, Zoe.
I'm going to add for NHS, I don't think there is necessarily a standard,
but there is in civil service. And so, there are standards around what we publish as well. So,
really, we shouldn't be using just PDF. We should be publishing for public consumption
things that are fully accessible. So, you don't necessarily need things to read it. So, there's
definitely information from civil servants, but that's not necessarily followed by public sector.
Got it. It's been shared in the chat, actually. Thank you.
Awesome. Thank you.
And just to add as well, our identity colours for NHS, our community are the same as NHS
generally, but we don't use some things which are particularly NHS branded. So,
there are things that are copyright, like the logo, and we don't use a particular typeset
font because you have to pay for the official, official one. So, we use the second one,
which is available, which is Arial. So, just to say for the purposes of recording,
accessibility should be something that we should be thinking about a lot.
So, to quickly follow up on accessibility, this is something that POSIT is paying very
close attention to. There is a, for not only in sort of UK and European Union guidelines that are
sort of have existed for a long time, we do pretty well for accessibility in our HTML formats.
There are a few things that we could do better, but we do fairly well.
But in the context of sort of American institutions, sort of US government,
and there is a change in the way that the Americans with Disabilities Act will be
enforced starting next year, and it will start essentially kicking in for websites as well.
And so, American universities, like public universities in the United States are
quite worried about this because essentially there are folks that believe that any websites
that are published as like course materials even will have to pass the accessibility guidelines,
or they will be liable. And the American with Disabilities Act, sorry, this is a little bit
US-centric, but the reason this is terrifying for people is that the way that enforcement of the ADA
works is quite strange. Essentially, people can file ADA claims against the website, and then
people need to fine them. So, the way that like all sidewalks in the US are ADA accessible is that
whenever someone finds one that isn't, they take a picture, they file a claim, and then the owner of
the property gets fined. And it's a quite fast process that stings because people just get many
fines over it. And so, that's how the enforcement happens, which is a strange, weird American thing.
But it's going to start happening for websites next year, presumably. And so, folks are quite
worried about it. And so, we are investing a lot of time in making sure that whatever tools are
used for this enforcement are going to, our things are going to pass too, and hopefully those will
transfer for like sort of more global usage as well. But this is something we're paying very
close attention, and you can expect us to like to work on this this year and the next year as well.
Excellent. All right. The next question up is from Daniel, and it says, I would be
interested in any updates regarding deploying a serverless Shiny application for R within Quarto.
So, there are a number of ways that you can do that. So, there's a link to an extension that
was developed by an external. So, James Valamuda was a frequent contributor to some Quarto features
and has a lot of really good extensions. So, Codeless Professor is his GitHub username, I believe,
or something like that. So, that's in the question. But we have, Posit has a number of libraries that
allow that as well. So, if you search for Shiny Live, and they are developed by Barrett Schlorke
and the Shiny team. And so, this is possible to do if your application doesn't do communication
with the data behind the server, right? Like one of the reasons people use Shiny is so that you can
have a server where there's a database somewhere, and there might be some authentication or some
execution of the like server code behind it, like gets data, brings it to the front end, and then
you visualize it. So, if your Shiny application doesn't have those concerns, then you can like
run it in Quarto in a mode. So, it's an extension that you have to install, but it's available not
only from there, but it's available from some of our developers as well. And so, you can use that
both in Python and both Shiny for Python and Shiny for R. So, that should be working. If the
question is sort of, you know, something doesn't quite work for me, please feel free to reach out
to us, either through Jeremy or, you know, we're always easy to find online. Send us an email,
we'll be happy to follow up on that. Christophe? Yes, I wanted to add that the link shared in the
question is directly, for example, for the Shiny live Quarto extension. So, this extension should
be working. Maybe there is case that are not handled yet, but I think like regarding the
question, any updates, we would need more details about what are expected. For work, we know we have
some probably things to look into it, like recently we had a question in the discussion board about
doing interactive dashboard with Quarto using Shiny live, and currently it's only using Shiny
not live, so not serverless Shiny. So, maybe there is more things to do, but there is no recent
update on that. But as Carlos mentioned, Shiny live is developed not by Quarto directly, but
another team. So, we know we need to work closer together in some use case, but we also need more
use case. So, if you have like any use case to share, to really help us to know what we need to
prioritize on this side. Daniel, did you want to share anything about use case?
Is Daniel even on? I don't see a Daniel on here. Yeah, thanks. So, the use case is primarily,
as you say, like if you want to use a Shiny app, then you have to have a Shiny server set up,
and that just is more overhead, more infrastructure required. So, if you want to share,
call it a dashboard, call it a report with stakeholders, then if you need to set up a
Shiny server to do that, then that's just more overhead. And if it was possible to do so without
a Shiny server, then that wouldn't be advantageous. The relation with Quarto regarding this use case
is that you can embed a Shiny live app inside a Quarto document. But you still need to build
the Shiny app in itself. What I'm not sure, it works straightforward, but it's like definitely
not documented on our website, is that Quarto has an interactive feature where you can build
Shiny app using Quarto, and it's how interactive dashboards work, or historically Shiny pre-rendered
documents in our markdown ecosystem that we leverage in Quarto. And right now, I don't think,
or at least it's not straightforward to do it from Quarto. Maybe it's possible, like generating
a Shiny app with Quarto and then converting the Shiny app to a Shiny live version, because I think
they have conversion function, but we should definitely have something more straightforward,
or at least I think we should have, but I did not research yet
how this should work. But like we have a question related to that, so it's why I guess it was in
relation. Thank you. And Daniel, just to make sure that I'm clear, was there a particular project
that's being held up because it doesn't work the way that you want, or is this just more of
a general question about when and if these things will be possible?
As we have access to more and more data, then stakeholders want reports on particular aspects
of that data, and you can parametrize data as well, and Quarto is good at that. You end up
potentially sharing quite a lot of reports. Ideally, really, you give people a sort of
relatively filtered, relatively conditioned report that they can then
drill down on slightly further using functionality within the report itself. That's like the ideal
scenario, really, and that would be helpful. Instead of sending out lots of detailed but
quite parametrized reports, and stakeholders then receiving quite a lot of different reports
in their email inbox, I recognize that you could set up a shiny server and have a dashboard there,
and that gets around the problem to some degree. But then the other problem that I find in that
situation is that you potentially end up sending people down a rabbit hole because they end up
spending a lot of time drilling down on the data or potentially not drilling down on the data
because they just wanted to have it at their fingertips. In an ideal world, really, when
sharing data with stakeholders, then it'd be nice to share a sort of HTML format report with them
that they can then drill down on their own machine, but that's not so easy at the moment
because, as I say, it kind of depends on a shiny server. In our setting in Newcastle Hospitals,
where I work, then we share, for example, antimicrobial resistance patterns using HTML
format quota reports with stakeholders, and then they can look at resistance patterns in their own
patient cohort to decide on things like which antibiotic do I feature in my guidelines,
for example, based on the resistance patterns of the organisms in that patient cohort.
Another example is we have patient-level data on prescribing patterns of antimicrobials,
and we've combined that with data from the EPR telling us whether someone has sepsis,
whether their OBS are stable, and then stakeholders can drill down on patients who are unstable,
who are on the wrong antibiotics, for example, based on the indication that's given in the
prescription. So we have lots of this kind of data, and I shared currently with stakeholders
in HTML format reports that I send to them by email, and I guess what I'm aiming at is,
like, looking for is an answer to the question, like, am I able to distribute this data
in a more efficient way than sending parametrized reports to the stakeholders
that they then have a static report to look at? Ideally, really, they would be able to drill down
on that report slightly, and that's why I think that has some sort of role.
Yeah, I really appreciate the extra context. That's very helpful. Yeah, the basic idea is
perhaps eliminate a few reports. If a single one has some interaction that could then encompass
the equivalent amount of info that might be in two or three reports, they get one instead.
And then if it's ShinyLive, it doesn't need a server component, and so now you're sort of
maximizing what the person can get out of the report and minimizing the infrastructure necessary
to make it happen. Yeah, yeah, that general principle is important. There's a more efficient
way to share reports now rather than email, but it still requires a server. It wouldn't necessarily
be a specific Shiny server. It could be something like Posit Connect, which I think the NHS has,
but I don't know if you all have access to it. But there is a license for it there,
so you could share that way. Folks could access the reports there just via a URL.
So, if that's available, you have access to that. I mentioned Posit Connect because it's
a commercial product, not so that you pay us for it, but it has a commercial license,
you can control who can access it. So, if you're sharing data that's sensitive,
then you don't have to worry about it being public. You just can have an NHS Connect server and
put all your reports on there. And if that were the case, it would also not be a problem
to put Shiny apps on there because it can host Shiny apps. So, then the serverless part becomes
less important because you have the Connect server. And then you just make whatever apps
and reports you want with whatever interactivity you want, and don't worry about having to eliminate
the server part. But we'll definitely take the feedback about the serverless too because
if we can make that even easier, I think we should.
Just to clarify, we were shaking our heads, so if we do blur this out, the NHS doesn't have
its own license for all NHS, so we tend to have to have them per trust or team or whatever. So,
we're seen as independent organizations, unfortunately. So, it means that it's not
actually available to many people. But in the trust I'm working at the moment, we are using
Flex Dashboard because the Shiny, although they have a Connect server, the Shiny isn't available
to everybody without logging in because the Connect server now makes it so that it makes it
public. And we can't have that public even though they're aggregate figures. So, where Shiny has
become very important over the Flex Dashboard, but we can't use it as a solution, is the scenario
where you have a report, this is for incidents, and people like it in their department area,
and then they want it in each other department area. So, then you have 20 metrics that become
20 times 5, but it's the same code underneath it. So, that's when reports, even when they're
parameterized, we have to be very careful because you'll have like a staging bit and a development,
and it just kind of explodes really in numbers. So, something like Quarto, if it can be used,
is also very familiar to people, whereas Shiny can be quite difficult with its reactive nature
and things. So, there are lots of colleagues who know R and could use R Markdown or Quarto really
easily, but then Shiny is like another step for people in their sort of maintenance side. So,
we've got this conundrum of what's available to us, what we can use and host, and we're all doing
it cheaply, to be fair, as well, because there's always a license, and our alternative often is
what the trusts already have, which tend to be the bigger products that are in the dashboard world.
I won't name them, but people will know in their areas as various sorts, and we get the response
often as, well, you've already got this one, why don't you use that? So, then the question is,
what does this give added value to that the products that we already have
provide us with? And that would be the SQL tools or the dashboard tools, or even, let's say, the
humble Excel. So, I just want to add a quick follow-up on we, as a company, or like the Shiny
team, in particular, is keenly aware of that barrier you just described, which is folks who
come from our markdown in Porto, and then they need to build something on Shiny. They sort of
hit a wall, to be very blunt about it, which is like, you know, this is very hard. And so,
without sort of saying that—I won't go and say that this problem has been solved by what I'm
about to tell you, but I think they're working really hard on it. And so, one of the things that
folks are doing is they're attempting to leverage sort of modern large language models to create
assistants. And so, folks at Posit are putting a lot of engineering behind taking these models
that sometimes help, but sometimes can be weirdly unhelpful, and actually turning it into something
that's quite usable. So, I'm going to share a link on the chat. So, this is called Shiny
Assistant. You can use it today. And this is built by the Shiny team with sort of doing a lot of work
behind the scenes on making it so that it is a chat interface to help you create Shiny
applications. And so, you can ask it to do things. It understands the context where you are
operating, and sort of, you know, it can work on, like, models that, like, currently Posit is
paying for, but it can also, like, take it and sort of—so, it's quite useful. And for
coding specifically for, like, sort of softer questions, I found these models to be way more
better than I expected them to be. You know, sort of—I think the Google AI response is complete
garbage, and it's helping destroy the internet as we know it, just to be clear where my positions
are on these things. With that said, I've had surprisingly pleasant experiences with asking
coding questions specifically to these models. So, if you're perhaps skeptical, as I am, of the
quality of these things, you should still give them a try. And I found them to be very useful
to get started on something where you kind of know your way around R code, but you have to do
this one new thing. And it's very easy to experiment. So, maybe this will be useful for
your team. And I'm sure that if you use it and you have feedback, the Shiny team would love to
do it and help it so that, like, this kind of friction is reduced as well. Are you able to
use them? I was talking to someone in, I think, healthcare, Northern Ireland, just this week,
I guess two days ago, and he said they're not allowed to use LLMs at all. Again, it varies,
and it will vary from trust to trust, and it will vary from country to country. So, I have heard
one of the other UK countries doesn't allow anything in the cloud. I think that was right,
whereas you'll find in other countries everything's in the cloud. So, it's like, I'm not sure what
security implications are of either. So, I can access it. I can see it on my trust VPN, and I
have seen it. It was demonstrated in our coffee encoding, which was by a colleague for the Shiny
app thing. But we do have to be cautious about what we put in regardless. So, there is that kind
of, like, reliance on people being careful, but it's a bit of an unknown world, isn't it?
Yeah, I understand, and I apologize. So, like I said, I understand all of the constraints of
these things, but even as a tool for self-like teaching, I found them to be useful. And then
you can, like, take your learning and, like, you know, turn it off and then, like, actually do it
on your side, and I found it to be productive in that sense. It appears in work. So, when people
who are not in the technical sphere see the AI in the corner of their word, they probably don't know
where that goes, how secure it is. So, this is something that each trust has to consider in its
own security. So, it could be available. It might be completely locked down, but Northern Ireland
is a lot smaller in who can interact with whom compared to, say, England. So, I'm not sure yet
what we can use, what we can't use, but it's available on mine. They probably just don't know.
You use it before they turn it off. For the Shiny team, we also have looked about, like,
what would it mean to package it up in a way that people could run it within their infrastructure,
so they can kind of control other aspects of it. So, if that's something that's interesting,
do let us know. It's going to take a little bit of work to kind of get it wrapped up and
make that easy, but that is something some clients have asked about and that we
have on a list of things to consider, of ways to make it useful, because it really does help
if it's behind your kind of firewall and in a protected kind of development environment,
because then you can use your data and kind of control what's happening, run either a local
model that you're running, or if you're on AWS, there's some possibilities there with Bedrock.
If that's something that is of interest, do let us know.
Yeah, I think HMRC is working with some internal LLMs. So, I know it's possible, but I imagine
it probably takes pretty large organizations like that to have their own internal LLMs.
Awesome. Thanks. We have about five minutes, so we'll probably get to maybe two more questions,
and I'll answer the next one pretty quick, but Corto team or Andrew, feel free to jump in if you
want, but the next question is, why did we make Corto, and how is it different from R Markdown?
Really quick on why we made it, the R Markdown ecosystem had a bunch of really awesome features
that people really love, and as JJ mentioned in a recent presentation, it has a requirement for
the NetR package. So, folks from other languages would then have to accept that requirement for R
and for the NetR package, and with Corto, we're able to have folks experience all the great things
from R Markdown, but without the requirements for R or NetR, because there's a Jupyter engine
with Corto, anything that Jupyter engine can do, you know, you can do it without having this
dependency on R, and from a user point of view, there's some really nice things about Corto
over R Markdown. In R Markdown, I would have R Markdown, BlogDown, Shur Engine for presentations,
so on and so forth, Flex Dashboard for dashboards, and you know, you end up installing a lot of
packages. With Corto, all of that is all within the Corto installation, and one nice benefit of
that is it makes the syntax across all of those outputs the same, whereas with Shur Engine, it
has its own syntax for making presentations that's different from an R Markdown HTML output,
for example, but in Corto, same syntax across, so that's a really nice user enhancement.
Anything else on why Corto from the team? If not, we can probably squeeze in another
question or two. Yeah, I was just going to say that not only can you do multiple languages,
which you pointed out, it is a lot easier to use on a polyglot team or a multi-language team,
and these are becoming more and more common, right, where you have a team where some folks
have R expertise and some folks have Python expertise because they have, they come from
different domains, or that's just sort of what they know, and so Corto is designed so that you
can have a website or you can have even a book where one of the chapters is written in R and the
other chapter is written in Python, and the end result should look the same because essentially,
like, different parts of the document are handled by different engines, right, the thing that takes
your code and, like, it disperses it with the Markdown we generate, and so it really is designed
for sort of, like, this polyglot world in which we see R as being, like, an amazing tool, like,
we're still supporting it. Our Markdown is actually still supported, and, like, you know,
it's not going anywhere, but there's a big whole world out there, and we want things to play nice
with one another, and Corto is very much designed sort of, okay, what can we do to make that possible?
Cool. I think we have time for one more, and there is a technical question. It's two down
on the list, so I'm going to ask that one since we have our technical folks with us.
Is there a way to get Corto to render output to a subfolder? I can then have the subfolder in the
Gitignore. I was secretly hoping we would be able to, like, squeeze by without asking that question
because time would bail us out. Unfortunately, that's surprisingly hard for us to do well.
The reason for that is your Nitr code or your Jupyter code has very deep expectations of where
inputs and specific files are, and when you change that, and if you want to do, like, relocatable
output in that way, you have to be very careful and know absolutely everything about what your
Nitr script open or your Python file open, so that some of the dependencies that you might
have moved, we need to move them in the right way. We need to understand the difference between
absolute paths and relative paths and project paths, and we are not very well supported with
that right now, so there are ways that if you really twist Corto's arm, you can make it do it,
but you're probably going to regret having made that decision. This is something we want to change
in the next couple of years, so we are going to fix that, but it's not a short-term thing for the
next release. There's a lot of work that we're doing on behind the scenes to enable that, and
it's ongoing, but there are some formats that allow you to do that. There are some ways that
you can make that work, but they are fraught with peril. It's sort of like you have to
be ready for some sharp edges.
First off?
Yeah, to add on that, because the question is concise, but maybe it's about, like, the output
flag. Just to be clear, with Corto project, you can move outputs to another directory, but with
single document, you can't. Sorry. So, if you use Corto project, you will do it. It's how website
works or block works. Your output will be in another directory, but with single document,
it's not the same, so you could use Corto project with default project, and you could have something
like that, but it's really difficult to do per document, as Carlos said, and it's something we
are careful about because also of the history of R Markdown, because in R Markdown, this was
something possible, so users that know R Markdown may think, like, it's why it shouldn't be possible
with Corto, but in fact, it's really difficult, and we had a lot of issues, and path handling is
really something, like, tricky, and we were stuck with what we did in R Markdown with some issues
we weren't able to solve, so we wanted to do it the right way in Corto, and it's why it's taking,
like, longer or it's more difficult to do. It's also because of this history, like, R Markdown
being, Corto being, like, step up to what R Markdown was doing. So, just to give a concrete
consequence of that, right, so, Christophe, correct me if I'm wrong, but in Markdown, the default option for
you to use is this thing, sort of a self-contained output. You get one HTML with everything, so it's
easy for you to, sort of, email them, right? You can get them, like, blogged down or, like, sort of, package
them, but, like, with a single R Markdown document, you get one big HTML file with everything, right?
If you want to put things on a website, that doesn't work so well because they all get all of
the CSS and all of the fonts and all that in one file, and your trial is huge, so you don't get any benefits
of shared resources. Corto goes the other way around and tries to make it so that it's efficient,
and, like, you can build things on your phone easily and things of that sort. As a consequence, we now
need to be very careful of paths, and that's where these constraints come into play, right? So, we are,
we're trying to figure that out, but it's a long path, so we're doing a little better on
some things, but don't hold your breath. If you absolutely need to, again, you folks have, like, an
important relationship with us, please contact Jeremy. We'll talk with you, but, sort of, this is,
it's complicated, is the answer. All right, we're out of time. Zoe, back to you.
I just want to thank everybody for coming and for putting up with some of the administration
around this, and thank you so much for everybody for the questions and the answers to the questions.
It's been really wide-ranging, a bit like the Corto products that you've got as well.
So, I'll end the call, the recording, I should say. All right, thanks, everyone.